Freshman dorms
elbritt 1 April 6, 2016, 7:37pm
Hey guys!
I was recently accepted to UVA c/o 2020. So, I little big of background, I go to a boarding school here in SC
and so I’ve lived in dorms for the past 2 years + 1 summer, and so as expected, I’m kind of done with dorms
at this point. Or at least with roommates. I was looking into possibly trying to get a single, though there is
not much information available online. I know that there is the Brown residential college that is kinda like
singles (apparently you have to walk through your roommates room if you are in one of them?? I’m a bit
confused on the setup.)
Anyway here are my questions:
How does the process work to select a single dorm?
Where are the singles located? I hear they are in worse dorms, (and someone said they attract “weird”
people, any thoughts?)
Just generally pros and cons of singles
Also, about doubles, how likely is it to be in suite style? My dorms here are suite style, so I feel like it’d be
a major bummer if I went from this to communal bathrooms.
And my final question isn’t about freshman year, but how many people move off campus to apartments?
How affordable are apartments in C-ville?
hazelorb 2 April 6, 2016, 8:55pm
There are just a few single rooms available for incoming first year students. There are some in hereford,
some in IRC (both of these, upperclassmen tend to claim the singles) and then some in gooch/dillard and
some in mccormick. The mccormick singles are basically a bed lofted under the staircase. The other 3
dorms listed are farther away than the other first year dorms. The singles are very small, the size of a closet.
I would really recommend not having a single.
If you are visiting UVA ask to take a tour of Brown college if none of the descriptions have made it clear for
you. It is not really a single.

I think you can put a preference for single dorm on your housing application. I had a friend who chose it
because it is substantially cheaper to live in a tiny closet room single vs regular sized double room.
Re: suite style: most of the first year dorms are hall style, but even the suite style dorms have tons of girls
sharing one bathroom. You only get a more private bathroom in Brown if you land a room in the corner,
otherwise it is 8 to a bathroom. IRC is hall style and so is hereford. Gooch/dillard is suite style with again
up to 10 sharing a bathroom.
Honestly I had the best “bathroom parties” in Brown so bathroom socializing is a fun part of the experience.
Sorry you’ve already done it in high school but you will do it again your first year.
Most students move off grounds. The more roommates, the more affordable.
elbritt 3 April 6, 2016, 10:13pm
@hazelorb How hard is it to get into Brown as a freshman?
doglover1998 4 April 7, 2016, 2:47am
@elbritt I attended a chat session, and the moderators, who were students, said that dorming is all random.
You don’t get to choose which dorm you’d like
UVADeanJ 5 April 7, 2016, 1:35pm
@doglover1998 , they are right that assignment in the traditional buildings is random, but students can
apply for the residential colleges.
During Days on the Lawn, there are dorm tours that visit Brown, one McCormick Road hall (“old,”
traditional dorm style), and one Alderman Road dorm (“new,” some suite style options).
mom23travelers 6 April 12, 2016, 5:49pm

Last year at days on the lawn we did a tour of the International Residential College (which you do not have
to be an international student to choose).
Charliesch 7 April 12, 2016, 7:07pm
A number of years ago, UVa used to let students pick a dorm. It was found that the engineers were often
picking one set of dorms and the preppies were picking another set of dorms (where their fathers lived), etc.
A policy decision was made that it was better to have students live with a cross-section of first year
students, which is when random assignments were made. The U. still tries to match roommates by whether
they are morning or late night persons, etc.
laughandlearn23 8 April 12, 2016, 7:56pm
Can anyone tell me if there are any first year dorms that have singles with a private bathroom shared by
people? Like basically suite style with your own room but a common bathroom or living area for like 3 or 4
people.
Charliesch 9 April 12, 2016, 8:46pm
I think there are some singles in Hereford. Most of the new residential halls were built in a hall-style
arrangement (like the old dorms on McCormick) because students said they found them to be more sociable
than suites. Almost all first year housing is doubles. I believe there are still a couple Alderman buildings
from the 1960s that are still left that have suites of 10 students (5 double rooms with a living room). In any
case, a first year student doesn’t get to choose unless they pick a residential college, and most of the
residential colleges are double rooms
tripleteens 10 April 13, 2016, 12:56am
Are freshman dorms all one price? I know the kids can’t chose a specific dorm, but my DS would need to
chose one of the cheaper dorms if the cost is less. I have 3 kids starting college so cost matters. I can’t
imagine the dorms cost the same…they have some with A/C and some without, some with a bathroom in
the suite and some that are shared down the hall. My DS actually liked the older dorms better…he wouldn’t
have to clean a bathroom and it was very close to the Engineering buildings.
So I guess what I’m asking is do new dorms with A/C and a bath cost the same as older dorms with a shared
bath and no A/C?
Charliesch 11 April 13, 2016, 11:04am
I believe the first year double-occupancy rooms are all the same price. The U. is spending tens of millions
to renovate the old dorms and to add air conditioning, but I don’t think it will be done for a couple years.
As far as saving money, the key will be to convince your kids to eat as many meals as possible within the
mandated meal plan, instead of going to restaurants all of the time. I told my kids that if they go to a
restaurant, they had to pay for it from the money they earned during the summer.
neonpinklime 12 April 13, 2016, 5:20pm
@laughandlearn23 Gooch/Dillard dorms are as you describe. 4 or 6 singles sharing a common bathroom
and living room. My son was in Gooch as a first year and he had a single in a 6 person suite. However, and
this is a big however, UVa has been renovating these dorms and converting the singles into doubles. How
many suites are still left that are singles? I don’t know,but I’d say a good portion of them have been
converted over to double rooms. The way housing works for first years is that you request your first,
second, third choice and so on of room type (single, double, triple) but you cannot request dorm. Housing
tries its best to match your preference. So when my S was a first year he requested (1) single, (2) double, (3)
triple. He received a single in Gooch and he was quite happy. However, he could also have ended up with a
single in McCormick (hall style) as I understand there are a few singles there but they are not suite style. It’s
my understanding that Alderman is all doubles hall style. I hope this helps.
laughandlearn23 13 April 13, 2016, 9:26pm
yes thank you @neonpinklime
neonpinklime 14 April 15, 2016, 2:48pm
@laughandlearn23 https://www.virginia.edu/housing/options.php?id=gooch&type=fy Housing says
there still are single room suites. The photos show a renovated suite with double rooms. The renovations
look wonderful. When my son was there two years ago it was nice but older, not renovated. That double
room they show I can see that what they did was take two singles and knock the wall down between them to
turn it into a double room. Looks like a nice size double I liked Gooch/Dillard because it’s close to the
Athletic Center and its dining hall Runk is outstanding.
hazelorb 15 April 16, 2016, 10:55pm
@elbritt it is not easy or hard, it is about fitting in with the culture. Take a look at the application and see if
it is something that intrigues and entertains you. If so, do apply!

