Brown is nice if you’re into the community. I wouldn’t bother with IRC or Hereford

Brown has a really good location and the strongest community of the 3. Brown also has the best upperclassman retention iirc. That being said I live in Brown and know great people at all 3, and all 3 can provide a great experience if that’s what your you’re looking for.

You can optionally apply to a residential college, which gives you some say. In total only around 5-10% of students live in a residential college, and at least in the case of Brown the incoming residents are selected by current residents in an anonymous application process (I don’t know about the other 2). I have also heard of people being randomly assigned to Hereford because they didn’t get enough applications, but I don’t know how common that is.

Old dorms are more spacious, new dorms are more modern/look more upscale. Don’t know much about the others

I love Gooch/Dillard it might be an extra 5-6 minute walk but the rooms are much bigger, the bathrooms are more private, and the community feels tighter

Old > New > Gooch/Dillard > Motels

Everyone's opinions will definitely be biased, but I personally loved Dunglison (alderman suites). They don't
look super pretty and new from the outside like some other dorms but I've never been this close with a group
of people and you kind of get an automatic friend group at the beginning of the year without trying lol. Plus 
there's a common room area that comes with a TV stand (one of my suitemates brought her TV), a fridge, and a microwave.


Motels are seriously underrated. I lived in Dunglison and my closest friends from uva are all from that time.
Motel-style is the ideal college dorm style and I think it's a shame that hallway-style dorms are taking over.
You don't get to choose anyways, they're all whatever you make of it. Don't stress about it too much, they all
have their perks and problems. The UVA community makes all the dorms great.
I would just be hesitant to so Brown, Hereford, or any of those type of dorms. Typically you don't get as much
variety of personalities and it's more sheltered. Brown does have the best location of any dorm but you don't
get to share the true "1st year experience".



Dillard >>> Dungle Jungle > Motels > Old Dorms > New Dorms > Kellogg > Anywhere else on Grounds >
Gooch
